2  GUIDE  TO  MODERN  COOKERY 
whatsoever  to  the  chef  concerning  his  work,  for,  let  the  talent 
or  merits  of  the  latter  be  what  they  may,  they  are  crippled  by 
insufficient  or  inferior  material.  It  is  just  as  absurd  to  exact 
excellent  cooking  from  a  chef  whom  one  provides  with  defective 
or  scanty  goods,  as  to  hope  to  obtain  wine  from  a  bottled 
decoction  of  logwood. 
The  Principal   Kinds  of  Fonds   de  Cuisine  (Foundation 
Sauces  and  Stocks) 
The  principal  kinds  of  fonds  de  cuisine  are  :■ — 
1.  Ordinary  and  clarified  consommes. 
2.  The  brown  stock  or  "  estouffade,"  game  stocks,  the  bases 
of  thickened  gravies  and  of  brown  sauces. 
3.  White  stock,  basis  of  white  sauces. 
4.  Fish  stock. 
5.  The  various  essences  of  poultry,  game,  fish,  &c.,  the 
complements  of  small  sauces. 
6.  The  various  glazes  :  for  meat,  game,  and  poultry. 
7.  The  basic  sauces :  Espagnole,-  Veloute,  Bechamel, 
Tomato,  and  Hollandaise. 
8.  The  savoury  jellies  or  aspics  of  old-fashioned  cooking. 
To   these   kinds   of  stock,   which,    in   short,    represent   the 
buttresses  of  the  culinary  edifice,  must  now  be  added  the  follow- 
ing preparations,  which  are,  in  a  measure,  the  auxiliaries  of 
the  above : — 
1.  The  roux,  the  cohering  element  in  sauces. 
2.  The  "  Mirepoix "  and  "  Matignon  "  aromatic  and 
flavouring  elements. 
3.  The  "  Court-Bouillon  "  and  the  "  Blancs." 
4.  The  various  stuffings. 
5.  The  marinades. 
6.  The  various  garnishes  for  soups,  for  relev^s,  for  entries, 
&c.  ("Duxelle,"  "  Duchesse,"  "  Dauphine,"  Pate  a  choux, 
frying  batters,  various  Salpicons,  Profiteroles,  Royales  CEufs 
fil6s,  Diablotins,  Pastes,  &c.). 
I— ORDINARY  OR  WHITE  CONSOMME 
Quantities  for  making  Four  Quarts. 
3  lbs.  of  shin  of  beef.  |  lb.  of  leeks  and  i  stick  of  celery. 
3  lbs.  of  lean  beef.  |  lb.  of  parsnips. 
1 1  lbs.   of  fowls'  carcases.  i     medium-sized    onion    with     a 
I  lb.  of  carrots.  clove  stuck  in  it. 
I  lb.  of  turnips. 
FONDS  DE  CUISINE  3 
Preparation. — Put  the  meat  into  a  stock-pot  of  suitable 
dimensions,  after  having  previously  strung  it  together;  add 
the  poultry  carcase,  five  quarts  of  water,  and  one-half  oz.  of 
grey  salt.  Place  the  stock-pot  on  a  moderate  fire  in  such  a 
manner  that  it  may  not  boil  too  quickly,  and  remember  to 
stir  the  meat  from  time  to  time.  Under  the  influence  of  the 
heat,  the  water  gradually  reaches  the  interior  of  the  meat, 
where,  after  having  dissolved  the  liquid  portions,  it  duly  com- 
bines with  them.  These  liquid  portions  contain  a  large  pro- 
portion of  albumen,  and  as  the  temperature  of  the  water  rises 
this  substance  has  a  tendency  to  coagulate.  It  also  increases 
in  volume,  and,  by  virtue  of  its  lightness,  escapes  from  the 
water  and  accumulates  on  the  surface  in  the  form  of  scum. 
Carefully  remove  this  scum  as  it  forms,  and  occasionally  add 
a  little  cold  water  before  the  boil  is  reached  in  order  that,  the 
latter  being  retarded,  a  complete  expulsion  of  the  scum  may 
be  effected.  The  clearness  of  the  consomm^  largely  depends 
upon  the  manner  in  which  this  skimming  has  been  carried 
out.  Then  the  vegetable  garnishing  is  added.  The  scum  from 
these  is  removed  as  in  the  previous  case,  and  the  edge  of  the 
stock-pot  should  be  carefully  wiped  to  the  level  of  the  fluid,  so 
as  to  free  it  from  the  deposit  which  has  been  formed  there. 
The  stock-pot  is  then  moved  to  a  corner  of  the  fire  where  it 
may  continue  cooking  slowly  for  four  or  five  hours.  At  the 
end  of  this  time  it  should  be  taken  right  away  from  the  fire, 
and,  after  half  a  pint  of  cold  water  has  been  added  to  its  con- 
tents, it  should  be  left  to  rest  a  few  minutes  with  a  view  to 
allowing  the  grease  to  accumulate  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid, 
whence  it  must  be  carefully  removed  before  the  consomm^  is 
strained.  This  last  operation  is  effected  by  means  of  a  very 
fine  strainer,  placed  on  the  top  of  a  white  tureen  (clean  and 
wide),  which  should  then  be  placed  in  a  draught  to  hasten  the 
cooling  of  the  consomm6.  The  tureen  should  not  on  any 
account  be  covered,  and  this  more  particularly  in  summer, 
when  rapid  cooling  is  a  precautionary  measure  against  fer- 
mentation. 
Remarks  upon  the  Different  Causes  which  Combine  to 
Influence  the  Quality  of  a  Consomme 
It  will  be  seen  that  I  have  not  made  any  mention  in  the 
above  formula  of  the  meat  and  the  vegetables  which  have 
helped  to  make  the  consomm^,  my  reason  being  that  it  is 
preferable  to  remove  them  from  the  stock-pot  only  after  the 
B  2 
4  GUIDE  TO  MODERN  COOKERY 
broth  has  been  strained,  so  as  not  to  run  the  risk  of  disturbing 
the  latter. 
The  quality  of  the  meat  goes  a  long  way .  towards  settling 
the  quality  of  the  consomme.  In  order  that  the  latter  be  perfect, 
it  is  essential  that  the  meat  used  should  be-  that  of  comparatively 
old  animals  whose  flesh  is  well  set  and  rich  in  flavour.  This 
is  a  sine  qua  non,  and  the  lack  of  meat  coming  from  old  animals 
in  England  accounts  for  the  difficulty  attaching  to  the  making 
of  a  good  consomm^  and  savoury  sauces  in  this  country.  Cattle 
in  England  are  killed  at  an  age  varying  from  three  to  four  years 
at  the  most;  the  meat  thus  obtained  has  no  equal  for  the 
purpose  of  roasts  and  grills,  and  anything  approaching  it  is 
rarely  met  with  on  the  Continent.  But  when  this  same  meat 
is  used  for  boiling  or  braising,  it  does  not  contain  enough  juice 
or  flavour  to  yield  a  satisfactory  result. 
This  shortcoming  is  furthermore  aggravated  by  a  fault  that 
many  commit  who  are  employed  in  the  making  of  consommes 
and  stock.  The  fault  in  question  consists  in  cooking  the  bones 
simultaneously  with  the  meat.  Now  to  extract  that  gelatinous 
element  from  bone  which  produces  the  mellowness  character- 
istic of  all  good  consommes,  it  is  necessary  that  the  gelatigenous 
bodies  should  be  cooked  for  twelve  hours  at  least,  and  even 
after  that  time  has  elapsed  they  are  still  not  entirely  spent. 
On  the  Continent  the  quality  of  the  meat  easily  compensates 
for  this  technical  error,  but  such  is  certainly  not  the  case  in 
England,  where  five  hours'  stewing  only  results  in  a  flat  and 
insipid  consomm^. 
I  therefore  believe  that,  in  the  case  of  either  consomme  or 
stock,  the  formulas  of  which  I  shall  give  later,  it  would  be  ad- 
visable for  the  bones  to  stew  at  least  twelve  hours,  and  this  only 
after  they  have  been  well  broken  up,  while  the  quantity  of  water 
used  should  be  so  calculated  as  to  suffice  exactly  for  the  im- 
mersion of  the  meat  that  must  follow.  The  contents  of  this 
first  stock-pot  should  include  half  of  the  vegetables  mentioned, 
and  the  consomm6  thus  obtained,  after  having  been  strained  and 
cooled,  will  take  the  place  of  the  water  in  the  recipe,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  directions  I  have  given  above. 
The  Uses  of  White  Consomme 
.,  White  consomme  is  used  in  the  preparation  of  clarified  con- 
sommes, in  which  case  it  undergoes  a  process  of  clarifying,  the 
directions  for  which  will  be  given  later.  It  also  serves  as  the 
liquor  for  thick  soups,  poached  fowls,  &c.     It  must  be  limpid. 
FONDS  DE  CUISINE  5 
as  colourless  as  possible,  and  very  slightly  salted,  for,  what- 
ever the  use  may  be  for  which  it  is  intended,  it  has  to  undergo 
a  process  of  concentration. 
2— THE  PREPARATION  OF  CLARIFIED 
CONSOMME  FOR  CLEAR  SOUPS 
Qwantities  for  making  four  quarts. — Five  quarts  of  ordinary 
consomm^,  one  and  one-half  lbs.  of  very  lean  beef,  the  white 
of  an  egg,  one  fowl's  carcase  (roasted  if  possible).  First, 
mince  the  beef  and  pound  it  in  a  mortar  with  the  fowl's  carcase 
and  the  white  of  egg,  adding  a  little  cold  white  consomm^. 
Put  the  whole  into  a  tall,  narrow,  and  thick-bottomed  stewpan ; 
then  gradually  add  the  cold,  white  broth,  from  which  all  grease 
has  been  removed,  that  the  whole  may  be  well  mixed. 
Then  the  stewpan  may  be  put  on  the  fire,  and  its  contents 
thoroughly  stirred,  for  fear  of  their  burning  at  the  bottom. 
When  boiling-point  is  reached,  move  the  stewpan  to  a  corner 
of  the  fire,  so  that  the  soup  may  only  simmer,  for  anything 
approaching  the  boil  would  disturb  the  contents.  A  good  hour 
should  be  enough  to  properly  finish  the  consomm^,  and  any 
longer  time  on  the  fire  would  be  rather  prejudicial  than  the 
reverse,  as  it  would  probably  impair  the  flavour  of  the  prepara- 
tion. Now  carefully  remove  what  little  grease  may  have  col- 
lected on  the  surface  of  the  consomm^,  and  strain  the  latter 
through  muslin  into  another  clean  stewpan.  It  is  now  ready 
for  the  addition  of  the  garnishes  that  are  to  form  part  of  it, 
which  I  shall  enumerate  in  due  course. 
Remarks  upon  Clarifications 
For  clarified  consommes,  even  more  than  for  the  ordinary 
kind,  it  is  eminently  advisable  that  the  meat  should  be  that 
of  old  animals.  Indeed,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  one  lb.  of  meat 
coming  from  an  animal  of  eight  years  will  yield  much  better 
consomm^  than  two  lbs.  would,  coming  from  a  fattened 
animal  of  about  three  or  four  years.  The  consomm^  will  be 
stronger,  mellower,  and  certainly  more  tasty,  as  the  flesh  of 
young  animals  has  absolutely  no  richness  of  flavour. 
It  will  be  seen  that  I  do  not  refer  to  any  vegetable  for  the 
clarification.  If  the  white  consomm^  has  been  well  carried  out, 
it  should  be  able  to  dispense  with  all  supplementary  flavouring, 
and,  the  customary  error  of  cooks  being  rather  to  overdo  the 
quantity  of  vegetables — even  to  the  extent  of  disguising  the 
natural  aroma  of  the  consomm^ — I  preferred  to  entirely  abandon 
6  GUIDE  TO  MODERN  COOKERY 
the  idea  of  vegetable  garnishes  in  clarifications,  and  thus  avoid 
a  common  stumbling-block. 
3— CHICKEN  CONSOMME 
White  chicken  consomm6  is  prepared  in  exactly  the  sam.e 
way  as  ordinary  white  consomm^.  There  need  only  be  added 
to  the  meat,  the  quantity  of  which  may  be  lessened,  an  old  hen 
or  a  cock,  slightly  coloured  on  the  spit  or  in  the  oven. 
For  the  clarification,  the  quantity  of  roast  fowl-carcases 
used  may  be  increased,  provided  the  latter  be  not  too  fat.  The 
process,  however,  is  the  same  as  in  the  clarification  of  ordinary 
consommds. 
The  colour  of  chicken  consomm6  should  be  lighter  than  that 
of  the  ordinary  kind — namely,  a  light,  amber  yellow,  limpid 
and  warm.  ^ 
4— FISH  CONSOMME 
These  consommes  are  rarely  used,  for  Lenten  soups  with  a 
fish  basis  are  generally  thick  soups,  for  the  preparation  of 
which  the  fish  fumet  whereof  I  shall  give  the  formula  later 
(Formula  No.  ii)  should  avail.  Whenever  there  is  no  definite 
reason  for  the  use  of  an  absolutely  Lenten  consomm^,  it  would 
be  advisable  to  resort  to  one  of  the  ordinary  kind,  and  to  finish 
off  the  same  by  means  of  a  good  fish  essence  extracted  from 
the  bones  of  a  sole  or  whiting.  An  excellent  consomm6  is  thus 
obtained,  more  palatable  and  less  flat  than  the  plain  fish  con- 
somm^. 
If,  however,  one  were  obliged  to  make  a  plain  fish  con- 
somm^,  the  following  procedure  should  be  adopted : — 
Clarification  of  Fish  Consomme 
Quantities  for  making  Four  Quarts. — Four  and  one-half 
quarts  of  ordinary  fish  fumet  having  a  decided  taste;  one-half 
lb.  of  good  fresh  caviare,  or  pressed  caviare. 
Mode  of  Procedure. — Pound  the  caviare  and  mix  the  result- 
ing pulp  with  the  cold  fish  fumet.  Put  the  whole  into  a  sauce- 
pan, place  it  on  the  open  fire,  and  stir  with  a  spatula  until  the 
contents  reach  the  boil.  Then  move  the  saucepan  to  a  corner 
of  the  fire,  and  let  the  consomm^  simmer  gently  for  twenty 
minutes,  after  which  strain  it  through  muslin  with  great  caution, 
and  keep  it  well  covered  and  in  the  warmth,  so  as  to  prevent 
the  formation  of  a  gelatinous  film  on  the  surface. 
Fish  consommi^s  are  greatly  improved  by  the  addition   of 
PONDS  DE  CUISINE  1 
such  ftfothatics  as  saffron  or  curry,  both  of  which  considerably 
add  to  their  quahty. 
'  5— GAME  CONSOMME 
The  necks,  breasts,  and  shoulders  of  venison  and  of  hare, 
old  wild  rabbits,  old  pheasants,  and  old  partridges  may  be  used 
in  the  production  of  game  consommes.  An  ordinary  consomm^ 
may  likewise  be  made,  in  which  half  the  beef  can  be  replaced 
by  veal,  and  to  which  may  be  added,  while  clarifying,  a  suc- 
culent game  essence.  This  last  method  is  even  preferable  when 
dealing  with  feathered  game,  but  in  either  case  it  is  essential 
that  the  meat  used  should  be  half-roasted  beforehand,  in  order 
to  strengthen  the  fumet. 
The  formula  that  I  give  below  must  therefore  only  be  looked 
upon  as  a  model,  necessarily  alterable  according  to  the  resources 
at  one's  disposal,  the  circumstances,  and  the  end  in  view. 
Quantities  for  making  Four  Quarts  of  Plain  Game  Consomme. 
3  lbs.  of  neck,  shoulder,  or  breast      i  medium-sized  leek  and  2  sticks 
of  venison.  of  celery. 
I J  lbs.  of  hare-trimmings.  i    bunch    of    herbs    with     extra 
I  old  pheasant  or  2  partridges.  thyme  and  bay  leaves. 
4  oz.  of  sliced  carrots,  browned  in  i   onion,    oven-browned,  with    2 
butter.  cloves  stuck  into  it. 
J    lb.    of    mushrooms,    likewise 
browned  in  butter. 
Liquor. — Five  and  one-half  quarts  of  water. 
Seasoning. — One  oz.  of  salt  and  a  few  peppercorns,  these 
to  be  added  ten  minutes  previous  to  straining  the  consomm^. 
Time  allowed  for  cooking. — Three  hours. 
Mode  of  Procedure. — Proceed  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  for 
*  ordinary  consommes,  taking  care  only  to  half-roast  the  meat, 
as  I  pointed  out  above,  before  putting  it  in  the  stewpan. 
The  Clarification  of  Game  Consommes 
The  constituents  of  the  clarification  of  game  consommes 
vary  according  to  the  kind  of  consomm^  desired.  If  it  is  to 
have  a  partridge  flavour,  one  partridge  should  be  allowed  for 
each  quart  of  the  consomm^,  whereas  if  its  flavour  is  to  be 
that  of  the  pheasant,  half  an  old  pheasant  will  be  required  per 
each  quart  of  the  liquid.  Lastly,  in  the  case  of  plain  game 
consommes,  one  lb.  of  lean  venison,  hare,  or  wild  rabbit  should 
be  allowed  for  each  quart  of  the  required  consomm6. 
Mode  of  Procedure. — Whatever  be  the  kind  of  game  used, 
the  latter  must  be  thoroughly  boned  and  the  meat  well  pounded, 
together  with  the  white  of  an  egg  per  four  quarts  of  consomm^. 
8  GUIDE  TO  MODERN  COOKERY 
About  two  oz.  per  quart  of  dried  mushrooms  should  now  be 
added  if  they  can  be  procured,  while  the  bones  and  the  remains 
or  carcases  of  game  should  be  browned  in  the  oven  and  com- 
pletely drained  of  all  grease.  The  whole  can  now  be  mixed 
with  the  cold  game  consomm^.  The  clarification  is  then  put 
over  an  open  fire  (stirring  incessantly  the  while),  and  as  soon 
as  the  boil  is  reached  the  saucepan  must  be  moved  to  a  corner 
of  the  fire,  where  its  contents  niay  gently  boil  for  three-quarters 
of  an  hour.  The  fat  should  then  be  removed,  and  the  con- 
somm^  strained  through  muslin,  after  which  cover  up  until 
wanted. 
6— SPECIAL  CONSOMMES  FOR  SUPPERS 
The  consommes  whose  formulae  I  have  just  given  are  in- 
tended more  particularly  for  dinners.  They  are  always  finished 
off  by  some  kind  of  garnish,  which,  besides  lending  them  an 
additional  touch  of  flavour,  gives  them  their  special  and  definite 
character  when  they  are  served  up  in  the  diner's  plate. 
But  the  case  is  otherwise  with  the  consommes  served  for 
suppers.  These,  being  only  served  in  cups,  either  hot  or  cold, 
do  not  allow  of  any  garnishing,  since  they  are  to  be  drunk  at 
table.  They  must  therefore  be  perfect  in  themselves,  delicate, 
and  quite  clear. 
These  special  consommes  are  made  in  a  similar  manner  to 
the  others,  though  it  is  needful  to  slightly  increase  the  quantity 
of  meat  used  for  the  clarification,  and  to  add  to  that  clarification 
the  particular  flavour  mentioned  on  th.e  menu — to  wit,  a  few 
stalks  of  celery,  if  the  consomm^  is  a  celery  one;  a  small 
quantity  of  curry,  if  the  consomm6  is  given  as  "  ^  ITndienne  "  ; 
or  a  few  old  roast  partridges  if  it  is  to  be  termed  "  Consomm^ 
au  fumet  de  perdreau  " ;  and  so  on. 
The  means  by  which  one  may  vary  the  aroma  of  con- 
sommes are  legion,  but  it  is  highly  important,  what  aroma 
soever  be  used,  that  the  latter  be  not  too  pronounced.  It  ought 
only  to  lend  a  distinctive  and,  at  the  same  time,  subtle  finish 
to  the  consomm6,  which,  besides  sharpening  the  latter,  should 
increase  its  succulence. 
When  the  consomm^  is  served  cold  it  ought  to  have  the 
qualities  of  an  extremely  light  and  easily-melting  jelly,  barely 
firm;  but  when  it  is  too  liquid,  it  rarely  gives  that  sensation  of 
perfection  and  succulence  to  the  palate  of  the  consumer  which 
the  latter  expects.  When  too  firm  and  too  gelatinous  it  is 
positively  disagreeable;  therefore,  if  it  is  to  be  relished,  it 
should  be  just  right  in  respect  of  consistency. 
FONDS  DE  CUISINE  9 
7— BROWN  STOCK  OR  "ESTOUFFADE" 
Quantities  for  making  Four  Quarts. 
4  lbs.  of  shin  of  beef  (flesh  and  |  lb.  of  minced  carrots,  browned 
bone).  in  butter. 
4  lbs.  of  shin  of  veal  (flesh  and  |  lb.  of  minced  onions,  browned 
bone).  in  butter. 
i  lb.  of  lean,  raw  ham.  i  faggot,  containing  a  little  pars- 
I  lb.  of  fresh  pork  rind,   rinsed  ley,  a  stick  of  celery,  a  small 
in  tepid  water.  sprig  of  thyme,  and  a  bay 
leaf. 
Preparation. — Bone  and  string  the  meat,  and  keep  it  in 
readiness  for  the  morrow.  Break  the  bones  as  finely  as  pos- 
sible, and,  after  having  besprinkled  them  with  a  little  stock-fat, 
brown  them  in  an  oven ;  also  stir  them  repeatedly.  When  they 
are  slightly  browned,  put  them  in  a  conveniently  large  sauce- 
pan with  the  carrots,  the  onions,  and  the  faggot.  Add  five 
quarts  of  cold  water,  and  put  the  saucepan  on  an  open  fire 
to  boil.  As  soon  as  the  boil  is  reached  skim  carefully;  wipe 
the  edge  of  the  saucepan ;  put  the  lid  half  on,  and  allow  the 
stock  to  cook  gently  for  twelve  hours;  then  roughly  remove 
the  fat;  pass  the  liquid  through  a  sieve,  and  let  it  cool. 
This  being  done,  put  the  meat  in  a  saucepan  just  large 
enough  to  hold  it.  Brown  it  a  little  in  some  stock-fat,  and 
clear  it  entirely  of  the  latter.  Add  half  a  pint  of  the  prepared 
stock,  cover  the  saucepan,  and  let  the  meat  simmer  on  the  side 
of  the  fire  until  the  stock  is  almost  entirely  reduced.  Mean- 
while the  meat  should  have  been  repeatedly  turned,  that  it  may 
be  equally  affected  throughout.  Now  pour  the  remainder  of 
the  stock,  prepared  from  bones,  into  the  saucepan,  bring  the 
whole  to  the  boil,  and  then  move  the  saucepan  to  a  corner  of 
the  fire  for  the  boiling  to  continue  very  slowly  and  regularly 
with  the  lid  off.  As  soon  as  the  meat  is  well  cooked  the  fat 
should  be  removed  from  the  stock,  and  the  latter  should  be 
strained  or  rubbed  through  a  sieve,  after  which  it  should  be 
put  aside  to  be  used  when  required. 
Remarks  Relative  to  the  Making  of  Brown  Stock. — Instead 
of  stringing  the  meat  after  having  boned  it,  if  time  presses, 
it  may  be  cut  into  large  cubes  before  browning.  In  this  case 
one  hour  and  a  half  would  suffice  to  cook  it  and  to  extract  all 
its  juice. 
Whether  brown  or  white,  stock  should  never  be  salted, 
because  it  is  never  served  in  its  original  state.  It  is  either 
reduced  in  order  to  make  glazes  or  sauces — in  which  case  the 
concentration  answers  the  purpose  of  seasoning — or  else  it  is 
lo  GUIDE  TO  MODERN  COOKERY 
used  to  cook  meat  which  miist  be  salted  before  being  cooked, 
and  which,  therefore,  imparts  the  necessary  salt  to  its  sur- 
rounding liquor. 
Brown  stock  ought  to  be  the  colour  of  fine  burnt  amber, 
and  it  must  be  transparent.  It  is  used  in  making  meat-glazes 
after  reduction,  also  to  moisten  meat  for  braising  and  to  prepare 
brown  sauces. 
8— BROWN  GAME  STOCK 
There  is  no  difference  between  the  game  consommes  and 
game  stock,  or,  otherwise  stated,  ordinary  game  consomme 
and  brown  game  stock  are  one  and  the  same  thing.  The  dis- 
tinction lies  in  the  ultimate  use  of  this  preparation ;  it  is  clari- 
fied, as  we  have  shown  (Formula  5),  if  it  be  intended  for  a  clear 
soup,  and  it  is  used  in  its  original  state  if  it  is  to  be  used  for 
a  thick  game  soup,  for  a  sauce,  or  for  reducing. 
9— BROWN  VEAL  STOCK 
Brown  veal  stock  requires  the  same  quantities  of  shin  and 
trimmings  of  veal  as  white  veal  stock  (Formula  10).  The  time 
allowed  for  cooking  is,  however,  a  little  shorter,  and  this  opera- 
tion may  be  completed  within  eight  hours.  This  stock  is  mostly 
used  as  the  liquor  for  poultry  and  poeled  game,  while  it  may 
also  serve  in  the  preparation  of  thickened  veal  stock.  Being 
quite  neutral  in  taste,  it  lends  itself  to  all  purposes,  and  readily 
takes  up  the  aroma  of  the  meat  with  which  it  may  happen  to 
be  combined.  It  is  admirably  suited  to  the  poaching  of  quails, 
and  nothing  can  supplant  it  in  this  particular. 
,0— WHITE  STOCK,  VEAL  AND  POULTRY  STOCK 
Quantities  for  -making  Four  Quarts. 
8  lbs.  of  shin  of  veal,  or  lean  and  5J  quarts  of  cold  water. 
fresh  veal  trimmings.  4  oz.  of  leeks  strung  with  a  stick 
I  or  2  fowls'  carcases,  raw  if  they  of  celery. 
are  handy.  i     faggot,    including     i     oz.     of 
12  oz.  of  carrots.  parsley,    i    bay   leaf,    and    a 
6  oz.  of  onions  stuck  with  a  clove.  of  parsley,  i  bay  leaf,  and  a 
Preparation. — Bone  the  shins,  string  the  meat,  break  up  the 
bones  as  small  as  possible,  and  put  them  in  a  stewpan  with  the 
water.  Place  on  an  open  fire,  allow  to  boil,  skim  carefully, 
and  then  move  to  a  side  of  the  fire  to  cook  very  gently  for 
FONDS  DE  CUISINE  ii 
five  hours.  At  the  end  of  this  time  put  the  stock  into  another 
stewpan,  add  the  meat  and  the  vegetables,  add  water,  if  neces- 
sary, to  keep  the  quantity  of  liquid  at  five  quarts,  let  it  boil, 
and  allow  it  to  cook  slowly  for  another  three  hours,  after  which 
remove  all  grease  from  the  stock,  pass  the  latter  through  a  fine 
strainer  or  a  colander,  and  put  it  aside  until  wanted. 
Remarks  upon  White  Stock. — One  should  contrive  to  make 
this  stock  as  gelatinous  as  possible.  It  is  therefore  an  indis- 
pensable measure  that  the  bones  be  well  broken  up  and  cooked 
for  at  least  eight  hours.  Veal  never  yields  such  clear  stock 
as  beef;  nevertheless,  the  consomm^  obtained  from  veal  should 
not  be  turbid.  It  must,  on  the  contrary,  be  kept  as  clear  and 
as  white  as  possible. 
Poultry  Stock  is  made  by  adding  two  old  fowls  to  the  above 
veal  stock,  and  these  should  be  put  into  the  liquor  with  the  meat. 
Fish  Stock 
u— WHITE  FISH  STOCK 
Quantities  for  making  Four  Quarts. 
4  lbs.  of  trimmings  and  bones  of      2  oz.  of  parsley,  root  or  stalks. 
sole  or  whiting.  J  bottle  of  white  wine. 
I  lb.  of  sliced,  blanched  onions. 
Preparation. — Butter  the  bottom  of  a  thick,  tall  stewpan, 
put  in  the  blanched  onions  and  the  parsley-stalks,  and  upon 
these  aromatics  lay  the  fish  remains.  Add  the  juice  of  a  lemon, 
cover  the  stewpan,  put  it  on  the  fire,  and  allow  the  fish  to 
exude  its  essence,  jerking  the  pan  at  intervals.  Moisten,  in 
the  first  place,  with  the  white  wine ;  then,  with  the  lid  off,  reduce 
the  liquid  to  about  half.  Now  add  four  quarts  of  cold  water, 
bring  to  the  boil,  skim,  and.  then  leave  to  cook  for  twenty 
minutes,  only,  on  a  moderate  fire.  The  time  allowed  is  ample 
for  the  purpose  of  extracting  the  aromatic  and  gelatinous 
properties  contained  in  the  bones,  and  a  more  protracted  stew- 
ing would  only  impair  the  savour  of  the  stock. 
Remarks  upon  White  Fish  Stock. — The  formula  which  I 
give  above  diverges  considerably  from  that  commonly  used, 
for,  as  a  rule,  fish  stock  is  diluted  far  too  much,  and  is  stewed 
for  much  too  long  a  time.  I  have  observed  that  fish  stock  may 
be  greatly  improved  by  rapid  cooking,  and  it  was  this  considera- 
tion that  led  me  to  dilute  it  scantily,  so  as  to  avoid  prolonged 
reduction. 
12  GUIDE  TO  MODERN  COOKERY 
It  is  likewise  necessary  to  remember  that  in  order  to  make 
perfect  fish  stock,  only  the  sole  or  whiting  should  be  used.  In 
a  case  of  emergency,  however,  i.e.,  if  the  supply  of  the  latter 
were  to  run  short,  a  quarter  of  their  weight  of  brill  bones  might 
be  added  to  them.  But  all  other  kinds  of  fish  should  be  avoided 
in  the  preparation. 
12— FISH  STOCK  WITH  RED  WINE  "" 
This  stock  is  comparatively  rarely  used,  because,  in  practice, 
it  is  naturally  obtained  in  the  cooking  of  the  fish  itself,  as,  for 
instance,  in  the  case  of  the  "  Matelotes."  Be  this  as  it  may, 
with  the  recent  incursion  of  a  custom  which  seems  to  demand, 
ever  more  and  more,  the  serving  of  fish  without  bones,  the 
following  formula  will  be  worthy  of  interest,  as  it  is  likely  that 
its  need  will  henceforth  be  felt  with  increasing  urgency. 
Fish  fumet  with  red  wine  may  be  prepared  from  all  fresh- 
water fish,  as  well  as  from  the  remains  of  sole,  whiting,  chicken- 
turbot,  and  brill.  It  is  generally  better,  however,  to  have  re- 
course to  the  bones  and  remains  of  that  fish  which  happens  to 
be  constituting  the  dish — that  is  to  say,  the  bones  and  trimmings 
of  sole  in  a  stock  for  fillet  of  sole,  the  bones  and  trimmings  of 
a  chicken-turbot  in  a  fumet  for  a  chicken-turbot,  and  so  on.  The 
preparatory  formula  remains  the  same,  whatever  the  kind  of 
fish  used  may  be. 
Quantities  for  making  Four  Quarts  of  Fumet  with  Red 
Wine. — Four  lbs.  of  bones,  heads,  and  trimmings  of  the  fish 
to  be  served;  three-quarters  lb.  of  minced  white  onions;  three 
oz.  of  parsley  stalks,  two  bay  leaves,  four  small  sprigs  of  thyme, 
and  four  cloves  of  garlic ;  two  bottles  of  red  wine  and  five  pints 
of  water. 
Mode  of  Procedure. — Put  all  the  above-mentioned  in- 
gredients in  a  thick  and  tall  stewpan,  boil,  skim  carefully,  and 
allow  to  cook  twenty  to  thirty  minutes  on  a  moderate  fire ;  then 
strain  the  stock  through  a  colander  into  a  tureen,  to  be  used 
when  required. 
Remarks  upon  Fish  Stock  with  Red  Wine. — This  stock 
stands  reduction  far  better  than  white  fish  stock.  Nevertheless, 
I  urge  the  advisability  of  trying  to  obtain  the  required  quantity 
without  reduction.  In  its  preparation,  one  may  use  some  mush- 
room parings,  as  in  the  case  of  white  stock,  if  these  are  handy, 
and  they  will  be  found  to  lend  an  agreeable  flavour  to  the  fish 
fumet. 
